---
layout: mainpost
projectname: Renaissance Suite
title:  "Renaissance 0.9 Released"
author: Lubomír Bulej
---

We are pleased to announce the release of the Renaissance benchmark
suite for the Java Virtual Machine. The suite is primarily focused on
parallelism and concurrency, and provides workloads that exercise the modern
parallel programming abstractions and primitives provided by the JVM and the
Java Class Library. Through these workloads, the suite aims to aid in 
understanding of how modern applications and data processing frameworks use
the concurrency features of the JVM, and to foster development of new
optimizations that enable more efficient execution of such workloads.

The Renaissance benchmark suite is intended to provide workloads that are not
available elsewhere, and thus complement the workloads found in the existing,
commonly used benchmark suites for the JVM, such as DaCapo, ScalaBench, and 
SPECjvm2008, which we gratefully acknowledge. We have found a great deal of
inspiration in these suites, and strive to match and, where possible, exceed,
the level of quality and usability established by these suites.

We realize that keeping a benchmarking suite alive (so that it evolves along
with the platform and applications) requires a tremendous amount of work. We
therefore aim to make the Renaissance development process as open as possible,
and invite the community to participate in the process. The code is open-source
and the contribution mechanism is open. The suite will be regularly updated
through minor releases, while new benchmarks will be introduced or retired in
major releases.

Version 0.9 marks the first public open-source release of the Renaissance suite
and is considered a major-release candidate with respect to the selection of
workloads included in the suite. The initial selection is based on the upcoming
[PLDI'19 paper](/resources/docs/renaissance-suite.pdf), which also provides
additional details on motivation behind the suite as well as detailed analysis
of individual benchmarks and initial performance results.
We are currently stabilizing the internal design of the harness and its public
APIs, and work on a number of features that need to be included in version 1.0,
the first major release of the suite which should be ready in few weeks.

We welcome any comments and contributions.

Happy benchmarking!
