---
layout: mainpost
projectname: Renaissance Suite
title:  "Renaissance 0.12 Released"
author: Lubomír Bulej
---

We are pleased to announce a new release of the Renaissance benchmark
suite. Apart from a number of internal cleanups, most changes in this
release focused on improving compatibility with modern platforms. Most
notably, we have moved away from Scala 2.11, Scala 2.12, and Spark 2
towards Scala 2.12, Scala 2.13 and Spark 3. Some benchmarks were
unaffected, some needed just dependency updates, and some needed a bit
more work.

The workloads, as implemented by the benchmarks, are largely unchanged,
but the code being executed as a result of the benchmark workload may
differ substantially from previous version of Renaissance, mainly due to
substantial dependency updates in some of the benchmarks. See the
sections below for more details.

On the platform compatibility front, the suite supports JDK8 and JDK11
on Linux, MacOS X, and Windows. While most benchmarks also run on more
recent JDK versions, some of them have dependencies that limit their
compatibility to a particular range of JDK versions.


We welcome any comments and contributions.

Happy benchmarking!


### Harness changes

The harness now automatically excludes benchmarks that are known to be
incompatible with the JVM on which it executes. This can be disabled
using the `--no-jvm-check` option on the command line.

The harness now allows using a specific base directory for scratch
files. The current directory is still the default, but it can be changed
using the `--scratch-base` option on the command line. For debugging
purposes, the `--keep-scratch` option disables deleting the scratch
directories when the harness terminates.

Finally, to make experimentation with benchmarks a bit easier, the
harness allows overriding benchmark parameters using the `--override`
command line option.


### Spark benchmark changes

The Spark benchmarks moved from Spark 2.0.0 on Scala 2.11.8 to Spark
3.1.2 on Scala 2.12.14, which is a major change in the underlying
libraries. In addition to various cleanups and compatibility fixes for
Windows, there have been several changes that may influence the overall
performance.

- The number of threads used by the Spark local executor is now
  [limited](https://github.com/renaissance-benchmarks/renaissance/pull/284)
  to reflect the parallelism of a particular workload, which prevents
  scalability issues on huge machines with tens of cores. The limit is
  configured using the `spark_thread_limit` parameter. - All workloads
  use the default partitioning of input data and limit the storage level
  of input data to memory only.
- `als` and `movie-lens` also limit the storage level of intermediate
  data sets to memory only to avoid benchmarking storage IO.
- `log-regression` now avoids repeated conversion from an RDD to
  DataFrame.
- `naive-bayes` now uses ML classes from the `org.apache.spark.ml`
  package because classes from the `org.apache.spark.mllib` package only
  served as wrappers, introducing unnecessary conversion from RDD to
  DataFrame.


### Benchmarks using Scala 2.13.6

The following lists Java bencharks with a simple Scala wrapper or Scala
benchmarks that have been updated to use Scala 2.13.6, along with
notable changes in some of them:

- `akka-uct` (previously Scala 2.11.8)
  - Updated `akka-actor` dependency (2.3.11 -> 2.6.12)
  - Very minor benchmark update for the 2.6.x API.
- `db-shootout` (Java)
  - Maximum supported JVM version set to 11.
- `dotty` (previously Scala 2.12.8)
  - Updated Dotty compiler (0.12.0 -> 3.0.0)
  - Compiles `scalap` sources instead of "type-system puzzles".
  - Adds hash-based validation of generated Tasty files.
- `fj-kmeans`, `future-genetic` (Java)
- `mnemonics`, `par-mnemonics`, `scrabble` (Java)
- `rx-scrabble` (Java)
- `scala-kmeans` (previously Scala 2.12.8)
- `scala-doku` (previously Scala 2.11.7)
  - Bundled `cafesat` dependency updated (0.01 -> [0.01-28-gd0edeaa](https://github.com/renaissance-benchmarks/dependency-cafesat/tree/renaissance/export)) and cleaned up for Scala 2.13
  - Bundled `scala-smtlib` dependency updated (0.1 -> [0.2.1-52-ga71d6b0]([https://github.com/renaissance-benchmarks/dependency-scala-smtlib/tree/renaissance/export)) and cleaned up for Scala 2.13


### Benchmarks using Scala 2.12.14

The following lists benchmarks that use Scala 2.12.14, along with
notable changes in some them:

- `finagle-chirper`, `finagle-http` (previously Scala 2.11.8)
- `neo4j-analytics` (previously Scala 2.12.8)
  - Benchmark ported to Neo4J 4.x API
  - Updated `org.neo4j.neo4j` dependency (3.5.12 -> 4.2.4)
  - Updated `net.liftweb.lift-json` dependency (3.2.0 -> 3.4.3)
  - Requires JVM versions between 11 and 15, inclusive (Neo4J requirements).
- `philosophers`, `scala-stm-bench7` (previously Scala 2.12.3)
- `reactors` (previously Scala 2.11.8)
  - `io.reactors.reactors-core` updated (0.7 -> [0.9-e605e145-60-g9838414](https://github.com/renaissance-benchmarks/dependency-reactors/tree/renaissance/export)) and cleaned up for Scala 2.12
- Spark workloads (previously Scala 2.11.8)
  - See [Spark benchmark changes](#spark-benchmark-changes) above.
